England and before I update you on the
latest developments in the food supply
chain let me first give you an update on
the latest data from the Cobra
coronavirus data file through the
government's ongoing monitoring and
testing program as of today 660 9850
test for coronavirus have now been
carried out in the UK including 29,000
and 58 tests carried out yesterday 150
2,840 people have tested positive and
that's an increase of four thousand four
hundred and sixty three cases since
yesterday 15950 three people are
currently in hospital with the corona
virus in the UK down from sixteen
thousand four hundred and eleven on the
25th of April and sadly of those
hospitalised with the virus 20 thousand
seven hundred and thirty-two have now
died and that is an increase to four
hundred and thirteen fatalities since
yesterday and we express our deepest
condolences to the families and friends
of these victims at the beginning of the
outbreak of this virus we saw
significant problems in panic buying
that episode quickly subsided and food
availability now is back to normal
levels and has been for several weeks
all supermarkets have introduced social
distancing measures to protect both
their staff and their customers and it
is essential that shoppers respect these
measures the food supply chain has also
seen a significant reduction in staff
absence over recent weeks a staff who
had been self isolating through
suspected coronavirus have returned to
work so absence levels are down from a
peak of typically 20% in food businesses
three weeks ago to less than 10% at the
end of last week and in some cases
individual companies reporting absences
as low as 6 percent we have put in place
measures to support the clinically
vulnerable
so far 500,000 food parcels have been
delivered to the shielded group that is
those who cannot leave home at all
due to a clinical condition that they
have and in addition the major
supermarkets have agreed to prioritize
delivery slots for those in this
shielded group and so far over 300,000
such deliveries have been made enabling
people to shop normally and choose the
goods that they want to buy we recognize
that there are others who are not
clinically vulnerable and therefore not
in that shielded group but who may also
be in need of help perhaps through
having a disability or another type of
medical condition or indeed being unable
to draw on family and neighbors to help
them so we have been working with local
authorities to ensure that those people
can be allocated a volunteer shopper to
help them get their food needs and
charities such as Age UK and others can
now also make direct referrals on the
Good Samaritan app to locate volunteers
for those in need many supermarkets have
taken steps to increase the number of
delivery slots that they have at the
beginning of this virus outbreak there
were typically 2.1 million delivery
slots in the entire supermarket chain
that has now increased to 2.6 million
and over the next couple of weeks we
anticipate that that will grow further
to 2.9 million so supermarkets have
taken steps to increase their capacity
but while this capacity has expanded it
will still not be enough to meet all of
the demand that is out there some
supermarkets have already chosen to
prioritize some vulnerable customers
with a proportion of the delivery slots
that they have and others have offered
to work with us and also with local
authorities to help establish a referral
system so that when somebody is in
desperate need a local authority is able
to make a referral to ensure that they
can get a priority
slot as we look forward more generally
towards the next stage in our battle
against this virus there are encouraging
signs of progress but before we consider
it's safe to adjust any of the current
social distancing measures we must be
satisfied that we have met the five test
set out last week by the first secretary
those tests mean that the NHS can
continue to cope that the daily death
rate falls sustainably and consistently
that the rate of infection is decreasing
and operational challenges have been met
and most important of all that there is
no risk of a second peak for now the
most important thing that we can all do
to stop the spread of the corona virus
is to stay at home to protect the NHS
and save lives thank you and I would now
like to pass over to Steven Paris who
will give you further update Thank You
Secretary of satan' good afternoon
everybody
I'd like to take you through some
familiar slides which indicate how this
epidemic is progressing in the UK the
first couple are related to the use of
transport and you will have seen these
before
so the first shows public transport
usage throughout the UK and in London
together with motor vehicle transport
usage and you will see we continue to
see a great reduction in the number of
journeys taken on public transport and
also a decrease in the use of motor
vehicles there is maybe the hint of a
little bit of an increase in the use of
motor vehicles and as I said yesterday I
think we need to ensure that this does
not mean that we are not continuing to
comply with the government instructions
on social distancing which are of course
so key to ensuring that we get on top
and control the spread of this virus the
next slide which again I showed you
yesterday is data taken from the use of
Apple maps as an example of people going
out and about so it looks at the
requests for directions in Apple maps
and again this shows decline from the
start of the introduction of so
distancing on public transport but also
request for directions for walking and
driving although again you can see there
might be a little hint there of an
increase in walking and driving and
again must emphasize how important it is
that we comply with those social
distancing measures and the reason
that's important of course is shown in
the next set of slides the first of
which shows the number of new cases
determined by testing in the UK and you
can see that the benefit of social
distancing is beginning to be reflected
in the number of new cases determined by
texting we are not seeing increases in
that we are seeing a fairly stable
number and that of course is also on the
backdrop of an increased number of tests
becoming available that in turn of
course there then plays through into the
number of hospital admissions again for
the vast majority of people this is a
mild illness but unfortunately for some
it requires a hospital I stay a hospital
admission and you can see that we now
have a very definite trend in reduced
number of people in hospitals that is
most marked in London but I think you
can also see that in the Midlands and
the beginnings of that in other areas of
the UK and so that is definitely showing
that our compliance with social
distancing is proving to be beneficial
that is reducing the transmission and
spread of the virus and of course for
those unfortunately who are more
critically ill again a minority in the
next slide you can see the proportion of
critical care beds that are being used
for the covert 19 patients in the UK and
you can see that proportion is declining
as indeed is the absolute number so
again evidence that all the hard work
everybody in the country has been doing
to maintain those social distancing
rules is paying off and then finally the
last couple of slides are deaths all
deaths are tragic and and my heart goes
out to all those who have been affected
by deaths of loved ones
the number of deaths in hospitals shown
here is now starting to decline the
deaths outside hospitals are reported
differently and I'll show you data on
that in a minute but this is absolutely
because we as a British public have paid
attention to the social distancing
guidance we have been given and then
finally the last slide is an
international comparison and there are
two lines here for the UK the first is
hospital deaths which we can report very
quickly but then also you will see a
line now at around a 24 25 in all
settings which includes data that
becomes available through the Office for
National Statistics that includes all
deaths but because of the way the deaths
are reported out of hospital there is a
lag in reporting that it is updated
weekly and we are looking at ways in
which we can ensure that that reporting
is done quicker but they will inevitably
be a lag on that thank you
thank you I'd like to turn to questions
starting with David Shipman from the BBC
thank you very much indeed a couple of
questions if I may first of all in the
modeling of the infection rate and the
different measures the effect that they
have on that rate it's pretty clear that
reopening schools has one of the least
impacts on increasing their race might
it be that when you look at relaxing
different measures reopening schools
might be one of the first things you
consider and a second question about
care homes we keep hearing from care
homes that they're still having trouble
getting testing for people with their
residents with symptoms let alone
residents who are suspected possibly of
having coded 19 can you give a
commitment to a date by when they might
get the testing that they say they need
I'll pick up on those briefly but might
ask Stephen too to come in after I think
on the first point about reopening
schools
Dominic Rob addressed this earlier this
morning and stressed the importance that
even as you started to consider
steps such as that it would still be
important in
- setting to have social distancing
measures in place and all the second
point on testing we have been ramping up
our capacity to do those tests currently
stands at over 50,000 a day and we have
started to invite large numbers of
people now working in the care sector
and care homes to undertake those tests
and significant numbers have I might now
passive - even he may have their precise
number yes thank you David - so I think
a few days ago the chief medical officer
Chris Witte gave a very clear
description here at this podium of the
sort of strategy that scientifically we
would have to think about adopting in
order to ensure that we don't see a rise
in infection in the spread of the virus
in the forthcoming months and in order
to make sure that we don't put ourselves
at risk of a second peak of infections
and that's broadly - to make sure that
we keep the transmission rate below that
number that we always talk about that
are of one which essentially means
ensuring that we don't go back to a
situation where one individual is
passing the virus on to one or more
individuals that the rate needs to be
below that but there are a number
scientifically as you have heard in
these press briefings there are a number
of different measures and different
approaches that can be taken to keeping
that our level below one natural
transmission rate below one and that is
exactly the work of Sage and independent
scientific experts to work out what that
range of measures look like and of
course school closures is one of those
measures I think it's highly likely that
there will be different combinations of
measures some of which are in place at
the moment but others that you have
heard about such as more sophisticated
track and tracing that in combination
will keep that number below one it's the
role of the scientists such as me and
others to look at that and to provide
advice but of course it's the role of
government quite rightly to look at
those and decide which particular
combination is the appropriate
combination to take forward I think on
testing I don't have much to add other
than to say that testing is clearly
expanding at the moment in the NHS we
respond
all for testing in hospitals and we are
expanding testing in hospitals
I know outside of hospitals testing is
expanding as well and I think what's
important is that that continues to
expand so that those residents in care
homes who are symptomatic and
asymptomatic and care workers have
access to that testing thank you very
much next we have Inigo Gilmore from
channel 4 all a question to the minister
if I may
we've been hearing very serious concerns
Minister about the lack of public health
experts who manage infectious disease
outbreaks on your government advisory
group saij we now know that Dominic
Cummings and Ben Warner attended but if
you won't tell us who else attended how
can the public get a sense of the
balance of their current expertise that
you say you're relying on and secondly a
question to Professor powers we've been
speaking to a local director of public
health who says that data is just not
being shared by central government and
it makes attempts to properly contact
trace and deal when is that going to
change what's your best estimate of what
it might be possible to reach contact
tracing again um well the important
thing to note is it's ages it's unusual
in the way it operates as an expert
advisory group in that it is convened in
response to specific emergencies and the
scientists that go on to that group that
will change depending on the type of the
emergency and it is important that those
scientists are able to have discussion
themselves free of external influence
and also that we protect their own
security as well so for those reasons
that we don't publish the names of those
on the group however their minutes and
their deliberations are published and
Steven might be able to tell you a
little more about that yes so I have I'm
a member sage that's in the public
domain and personally I have no problem
providing people give permission I think
the chief medical officers this officer
who said the same with the names of
participants and sage being published
clearly that's not my idea
but I'm perfectly happy for my name to
be in the public domain on the question
of contact tracing you broke up a little
bit but I think the question was when is
contact tracing likely to come in and be
effective so I think there's there's
probably a general comment on contact
tracing so contact tracing which is a
very tried and tested way of managing
outbreaks it's more difficult you know
in an epidemic but it's certainly a
tried and tested way of managing
outbreaks obviously takes a lot of
resource a lot of time to trace
effectively the contacts of an
individual person who has tested
positive it can be aided by technology
and the development of a digital app
will no doubt help in that setting but I
think the general point is that the
lower the number of new cases in the
population the easier it is to do
because it involves contacting less
people overall so you know to give you a
number if there are 4,000 cases new
cases a day and you have to contact race
a on average 30 that's 120,000 people to
contact race if it's if it's 2,000 it's
half that so the point is getting the
infection rate as low as possible will
put us in a position where contact
tracing will be at its most effective so
as the secretary state for Health and
Social Care said here a couple of days
ago public health England are building
up the capacity to do contact tracing
technology is being used to develop an
app that will will assist but the point
at which to introduce that is the point
at which we have maintained social
distancing we have driven the infection
rate down and it be can be introduced in
a way that is most effective as possible
so the core message is really to
continue to comply with the social
distancing messy instructions because by
getting the infection rate down which is
all which is what is happening at the
moment will get us in the best position
for track and trace thank you
next we've got Paul brand from ITV thank
you given the Prime Minister's return
tomorrow when do you expect him to
follow the First Minister's of Scotland
and Wales and start setting out a
strategy to potentially begin lifting
for lock down and on care homes today
the Foreign Secretary's
a number of deaths in care homes was
coming down at a similar rate to the
number of hospital deaths what's the
evidence of that please and can you
share it with us well look on your first
point the Prime Minister has been in all
of our thoughts over these last few
weeks as he's faced a very difficult
encounter with the virus and we are all
delighted that he is going to be back at
the helm and returning to work tomorrow
the government has set out its approach
which is that a week ago we decided that
it was too early to ease any of those
social distancing measures it will be
reviewed again in a couple of weeks time
and that would be the right moment to
consider the scientific evidence that we
have particularly the latest medical
evidence very important that we don't do
this prematurely and risk a second peak
very important that we see a consistent
downward trend and sustainable reduction
in the number of infections and that is
our position but look I'm sure that it's
on at some stage during the course of
the week ahead you will be hearing from
the prime minister yes I think as I've
said before I think it's really
important to remember that the approach
that needs to be taken to keep on top of
this virus to keep transmission down
will need to evolve over time and and it
will need to evolve over time because
the science and what we know about the
virus is is developing all the time we
are learning more and more and and even
as we signed here today there are
certain pieces of key information that
we would love to have to help us plot
away through the coming months he's not
available so so one piece of information
is ease how many people develop immunity
to the virus and how long that immunity
lasts and the truth of it is of course
that we won't know how long immunity
lasts until we've got some way into this
epidemic and we have been able to follow
individuals in a serial way in other
words take blood tests over months to
see what happens to their immunity their
antibody levels and as that information
becomes available and there are studies
ongoing this country that will do
exactly that
country's we will be able to evolve the
scientific advice as to how to manage
this virus so this is not a sort of
binary choice between being in one place
and another set of measures this is
going to be a continually evolving
approach based on the science and the
emerging science as we learn more about
it great thank you very much next we
have Heather Stewart from The Guardian
go ahead hello you've talked about some
of the changes supermarkets have made to
make deliveries lots more available and
it's still very very difficult for
people to get a food delivery slot and
some basic foodstuffs are very very hard
to get hold of I wonder where the
shortages of some food products and
price increases for others are part of
the new normal we're going to have to
get used to planning coming months
well we've been monitoring the food
supply chain quite carefully and to date
there isn't any serious disruption to
international trade flows we're also
seeing retail sales having had that
episode in panic buying several weeks
ago return to normal levels now or in
some cases slightly below normal levels
it is the case that the social
distancing measures at supermarkets have
had to put in place means that there are
times when they're not able to restock
shelves as freely as they would
ordinarily but that is not a problem of
food supply that is simply the fact that
social distancing sometimes makes it
harder for them to get the goods on
their shelves but generally we've seen a
dramatic improvement from the problems
that we saw three or four weeks ago the
international food supply chain
continues to work well although there
are isolated cases of trade being being
disrupted particularly for instance some
Goods coming from India but most of our
trade with near neighbours in in Europe
is continuing to flow normally we're
also acutely aware that we're about to
start the British season in fresh
produce in soft fruits and salads we
estimate that probably only about a
third of the migrant labor that would
normally come to the UK is here and was
probably here before lockdown and we are
working with industry to identify an
approach that will encourage those
millions of furloughed workers in some
cases to consider taking a second job
helping get the harvest in in June it's
not an issue at the moment since the
harvest has barely begun but we do
anticipate that there will be a need to
help recruit staff for those sectors in
the month of June Kate Ferguson from the
Sun I thank you Secretary of State's one
questions for you and one for Steven
power we've seen reports in the
newspaper today but passengers arriving
in Britain will be told to quarantine
for two weeks how are you going to be in
will police the vacant spot check and if
lockdown is eased and thrips can go on
their summer holidays will they have to
take another two weeks off work yourself
I relate back home here when they return
and to mr. power we've seen today's
death figures are the lowest that they
have been this month you've previously
spoken about green shoots are we turning
a corner and I went through the peak now
thank you well in your your first point
I know there's a lot of speculation
around these things and I think the the
point is this that as we move to a new
phase at some point in the future we're
not there yet and not ready to make that
decision yet international travel could
become a more significant part of the
risks to manage at the moment all of the
evidence suggests that it is only a tiny
proportion of the of the cause of the
corona virus outbreak if we got to that
point you know a number of measures
would be considered but no no decisions
have been even taken in this space yet
we've taken a conscious decision as a
country not to close our borders this is
important that we keep trade flowing and
should there be medical advice at some
point in the future as we move to new
stages that this is an area that
should be looked at and considered then
obviously that is the time to do that
thank you so I think when you go back a
number of weeks ago when I started
presenting as others do the the charts
that we present at the start of these
briefings what I was pointing out was
that as we begin began to see reductions
in the use of transport indicating that
the British public were beginning to
comply with the guidance that had been
issued on social distancing that if that
was sustained then over time it would
translate into a reduction in the number
of cases a reduction in the number of
hospital admissions and then finally
through a reduction in the number of
deaths and of course a number of weeks
ago those charts all showed that
infections and hospital admissions
people in critical care and debt were on
the increase over the last few weeks of
course we have seen because those social
distances measures have been adhere to
that those curves have started to change
and as I showed you just a few minutes
ago we are now beginning to see declines
particularly in London and yes debts are
now either plateauing around the country
or beginning to decline but but I should
emphasize that that those benefits have
only occurred not by luck as I've said
before but because people have complied
with the instructions that we've all
been given and they have followed the
science so the science of this is quite
straightforward if we reduce the number
of people that can be infected from an
individual person who has the virus to
below on average one then the virus
starts to go into decline and the number
of infections start to fall that is that
is the simple principle behind the
measures of social distancing and and
what you have seen is all our efforts
hard though they might be have begun to
pay off but of course the other point to
make there of course is that it will
only continue to pay off if we continue
to keep social distancing and we
continue to comply with those messages
because of course my fear is the fear of
all of us is
those curves won't continue to be on a
downward trend but will start to go in
an upward trend and we're not at the
point that any of us can be absolutely
confident that that's not going to be
the case we want to avoid a second peak
we want to avoid arise and so I can't
emphasize enough that this is not the
time to say actually we've done a good
job we need to stop complying with our
social distancing instructions and the
government guidance this is exactly the
time to keep that up it's exactly the
site time and that's why when I showed
you the transport craft and kurz earlier
that slight uptick in Motor Vehicles
that slight uptick in the use of Apple
maps we need to keep a close eye on that
we all need to remind ourselves that
this has been a really tough four weeks
and we don't want to lose the benefits
that have come from this we need to keep
going and we need to make sure the
number of infections continues to
decline thank you very much and finally
Jen Williams from the Manchester Evening
News hi thank you and the question first
for the Minister for May and then one
for both you and council so clearly on
the front line of delivering social care
during the pandemic and so far the
government has promised 3.2 billion
pounds active local government but one
Conservative councillor spoke to you
today said that while it's welcome it's
merely a sticking part of watched from
Greater Manchester's Town Council's
alone and forecasted and financial
effective more than half a billion
pounds this financial year then leaders
a warning of catastrophic cuts of
services hypnosis parent help further
the rule government make good on its
promise to do whatever it takes and
commit to fully reimbursing councils for
their losses and secondly I just wanted
to bring back the question that Paul
brand
earlier on and yes in care homes and
what the evidence actually is currently
that they are bawling and probably
something that I would add to that why
we're deaf Singh care homes not factored
into the same kind of counting as deaths
in hospitals at the start of this was
that an oversight or what's the actual
reason for the fact that we didn't start
this process with a daily care home
death figure thank you well that the the
government of course recognises our
these are extraordinary times
local authorities have indeed taken on
additional burdens - to help get through
this crisis and it's in recognition of
that as you alluded to in your question
that Robert Genrich announced a package
of additional financial support for
local authorities we estimate that that
is that that's that's the right approach
to support them through this difficult
time of course some of the things that
they're doing now they're often geared
up to do anyway and they have their own
emergency response sensors and emergency
response procedures that are that are in
place and that they do on a regular
basis but we recognize that there are
new burdens and that's why there's been
that additional financial package
announced by the Secretary of State's in
MHC LG yes so thank you so obviously as
NHS England national medical director I
most concerned with the reporting of
deaths within hospitals of course we
care about all death absolutely but the
mechanism of reporting deaths in
hospitals falls within NHS England and
of course the other DeVault
administration so I think it's worth
pointing out there's important
differences about the way the data is
collected within the NHS we are work
with several hundred hospitals in order
to collect that data on a daily basis
and we're collecting the data from
people who have died in hospital who we
know have tested positive so that's one
important thing to remember the NHS all
those organizations are within the NHS
family they're all NHS organisations who
are used to putting in daily reports -
in my case NHS England so there's a very
there's a system that already exists for
instance that we use during winter
pressures that means that it's very
straightforward for those trusts to to
report that data on a daily basis in the
care home sector of course there are
many many thousands of care homes
operated by many many different
independent organisations and so that
sort of daily rhythm of reporting in is
just not something that that occurs in
in care homes in the same way and then
of course the other important difference
is as I said in hospitals what we're
reporting
that's where we know somebody is tested
positive in the community debts that are
being reported is that where the
registration process the doctor who's
certified death has put coded 19 on the
death certificate and then that has gone
through the usual death certification
process and it's the Office for National
Statistics as I said earlier that
gathers that data I mean and and as I'm
sure everybody knows that process takes
several days and can take longer so
again as I said earlier I know
colleagues in government are looking to
speed that up whether there is an
inevitable longer time for those desk to
be recorded and the very quick reporting
that we can get on a daily basis within
the NHS so it simply reflects the
differences in the to process processes
and the difference in what we're
reporting in terms of test positive
deaths in hospitals and death
certificates in the community thank you
very much Stephen and we're out of time
I simply wanted to conclude though by
recording my thanks and paying tribute
to all of those who are working
throughout the food supply chain from
farmers manufacturers and retailers the
response of this industry to ensure that
we have the food as a country that we
need has been truly phenomenal but thank
you all very much
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC dovecote UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News